Okay. So now we'll start workshop five and
we'll implement the whole Google sign in process
flow that Annabel just showed. And we'll also
add some changes to our front end and
back end to support the login flow. Here's
all the steps of the workshop. It's very
meaty, but we'll slowly go through it together.
So open up your code ID and we'll
start by git resetting hard. Let's fetch all
the new changes made in the remote branch.
Let's check out to branch w five dash
starter, And we'll do NPM install. And in
two separate terminals, let's run NPM start and
npm run dev. Okay. And once you've done
that, let's open up nav bar dot j
s x to look at some changes we've
made for this workshop. So the first thing
you'll notice is that we have a new
sign in button in our nav bar that
we didn't have before. And in nav bar
dot j s x, you'll see that this
is from a Google login component that's provided
to us by the React OAuth Google Library.
And this is a login component that Google
provides for us in their library that will
handle the login process for us. So upon
a successful login, we'll also call the handle
login function, which we have a skeleton for
here and we haven't filled it out yet,
so all we have is a console log
of the response that the Google auth server
sends to us. So another change that we've
made is an index dot j s x.
To be able to send these requests to
Google OAuth server, the Google OAuth server has
to recognize us as a valid user, and
that's done through the Google client ID. So
anyone can make a Google client ID for
their web application, and this is like a
username for our web app, and it allows
the Google server to recognize our application as
a valid user so that we can make
these requests the server and get responses back.
So what we've done with the Google client
ID is that we've wrapped our entire web
application, which is in the router provider, with
a Google OAuth provider, and we pass in
the client ID so that every time we
make a request to the server of the
Google sorry, the Google server, it'll pass this
Google client ID through. So what does this
look like? So before we have our client
and server sending requests and responses back to
each other, but when we think of this
in terms of the Google client oh, sorry,
the Google server, we can think of our
entire web application of a client as a
client, and instead, our entire web application is
now sending requests to the Google OAuth server.
Okay. So to recap, the Google client ID
allows us to access the Google auth API
in the Google server. It tells us what
our app is called and its URL, and
later on, you'll see that both the front
end and back end will need the client
ID because if you remember, the front end
will handle the login process through the Google
server endpoint, but in our server back end,
we'll also need to verify the token once
it gets sent back to us. So we'll
need the client ID again in the back
end. And this isn't secret information, so it's
okay to commit it to git. So for
now, an index.jsx will all share the same
Google client ID, but later on, you'll have
to make your own for your own web
lab project and we'll go over how to
do that in our deployment lecture. Okay. So
let's look at what logging in looks like
so far. If I go back to my
web sorry, my cat book application, I can
sign in with Google. Once I'm signed in,
I see the same sign in button, which
is not what we want. We want the
nav bar to show the login button when
we're logged out and the log out button
when we're logged in. So take a moment
to think about how we can do this.
And feel free to talk to your neighbors.
Okay. Does anyone wanna try answering the question?
No. That's okay too. What we can do
is we can keep a react state in
our nav bar to keep track of when
we're logged in. So what we'll do is
we'll create a react state called logged in.
So let's implement our handle login function. So
first, let's keep track of a login state
using called logged in. So navigate back to
navbar.jsx, and at the very top, we'll wanna
use the use state hook so that we
can create a login state. So do const
logged in, set logged in. Oh, we'll have
this be a use state and we'll wanna
start the login state as false because otherwise
authenticated, the user should be logged out. So
we now have a logged in state that
is initialized to false. So now what we'll
wanna do is once the Google login component
returns on success, then our front end should
know, oh, now we're logged in. So it
calls the handle login function and what we
wanna do now is in the handle login
function. We'll wanna call set logged in, And
now we wanna set logged into true. So
that's what you should have so far. Thumbs
up if you need more time. Alright. So
now we'll move on to the next step.
So now our web our front end knows
once we're logged in because once handle login
is called, we'll set the login react state
to true. Oh, I just gave you the
answer. Yeah, just to reiterate, once the Google
login component returns in on success, it'll call
the handle login function which now sets logged
in to true. So we wanna do some
something similar for the log out function. Here,
for the login, we already have a Google
login component that renders a button for us,
but unfortunately, Google's library doesn't have a logout
function, so we'll just use the button property
and instead of having an on success attribute
that calls the handle login function, you'll wanna
write an on click attribute that calls the
handle logout function. So for this part of
the workshop, you'll wanna add a logout button
using button. On click, it should call a
handle logout function, and you want to define
a handle log out function that performs an
analogous task to handle log in, but instead
of setting logged into false, sorry, instead of
setting logged into true, it should set it
back to false. So give that a try
and feel free to hop on the queue
if you need any help. Okay. Raise your
hand if you need another minute or two.
Okay. Let's go over how we can do
that. So first, we'll start off by adding
a new button for log out. Under the
Google login component, I'll just make a button
component here. And just call it log out.
And on click, let's have it call our
handle log out function. Which we need to
define, and we'll do that right here. So
let's define a handle log out function. And.
You can console log logged out. And then
we'll wanna set logged in back to false.
So now if we go back to our
local host. Yeah. If you go back to
our local host, we have both a login
function and a logout function. So now what
we wanna do is we'll want to conditionally
render the login and logout buttons. So we
wanted to make it show Google login when
the user isn't logged in and we wanted
to show the log out button when the
user's logged in. So here's a hint, here's
a template for how you can do conditional
rendering in the return. So give that a
try and let us know if you have
any questions. Just to clarify the notation for
the conditional rendering is this first line and
what it's doing is saying that if the
condition is true, then render x, otherwise render
y. But you wanna use this notation. Okay.
Now let's go over how we can conditionally
render the login and log out buttons. So
here, in the return, we have two buttons
side by side. But what we'll wanna do
is we wanna check if logged in our
logged in state is true. So let's wrap
these in brackets. You wanna check the condition
is logged in true. So we'll do logged
in question mark. And then we'll have two
two things that can render. So if logged
in is true, we're gonna wanna render the
log out button. So we can paste that
into the first argument. And the second thing
renders if logged in is false. So if
we're logged out, we'll wanna render the log
in component. So that it looks like that.
Okay. If you didn't catch that, here's the
solution. I'll give you some time to copy
that. Okay. Let's take a look at what
we have now on local host 5173. So
now I have a sign in button, and
if I'm signed in, it'll now show up
the log out button. So with this step,
we now have a working log in and
log out button, and they'll conditionally render depending
on the new react state that we've added
in nav bar dot j s x called
logged in. And I think we'll break free
lunch. So just to recap, in our starter
step, we implemented working login log out buttons
and we define a login state so that
we can keep track in the front end
of whether we're logged in or not. So
now, once we're logged in, we should be
able to see a log out button, and
if we're logged out, we should be able
to see a log in button. So now
that users can log in, let's store data
about the users that use Catbook. Take ten
seconds to think about how we can do
that. Does anyone wanna take a stab at
it? No. And that's okay too. Let's add
a user collection into our Mongo database to
keep track of all the users that use
Catbook. So as we went over in the
database lecture, we wanted to find a user
model and schema in our back end. So
now on if you're checked out to step
one, you should see a new file in
the models folder in server called user dot
j s. You can copy and paste the
template from story dot j s, and what
you'll wanna modify is the names and collections
being passed in. And for this schema, we'll
wanna have two fields. Let's keep track of
a name field and a Google ID field
for each user. So take a few minutes
to implement the model in schema and user
dot j s. Raise your hand if you
need more time. Okay. Let's go through how
we can add our user model and schema
to the back end. So first, I'll go
into story dot j s because we already
wrote a story schema and exported it there,
so I'll use that as a template. So
what I'm doing is I'm copy pasting that
into user dot j s. So in our
first line, we're requiring Mongoose and instead of
a story schema, we you wanna define a
user schema and we wanna have two fields.
Let's have a name field with type string
and a Google ID field with type string.
And instead of structuring the story collection, we're
using this to structure the user collection. So
you should replace this with user, and we
want this user collection to have structure user
schema. So now we have we should have
a structured user collection that follows the schema.
So I have the solution right here. Feel
free to check out to step two if
you missed any of that. Raise your hand
if you need more time. No? Okay. Let's
move on to step two then. So I'll
check out the step two and we'll all
wanna do this because from our side, we've
made a few changes that you didn't have
originally in step one. So go to your
terminal. And we wanna check out w five
dash step two. If you made any changes,
you'll want to reset hard first and we
can check out to w five step two.
If it says that you're behind by commit,
you just wanna git pull. So let's talk
about some changes we've made to the workshop.
First is to survey dot j s. As
in Annabel's lecture, we're now using a session
to persist authentication. So once the user's logged
in, auth dot js will set up a
session for us, which is persisted by express
dot js, and this will allow the user
to stay logged in even after we've refreshed.
Another change we've made is that now we
have a file called auth dot j s.
And this is a library that the web
lab staff have written for you, and we've
provided a few functions. So let's go through
them. First, we have a login function. The
login function is in the back end server,
and once the front end gets its token
from the Google auth server, it can send
this token to the back end. And the
back end will take this token, and this
login function, it'll take the token from the
request body. It'll verify with Google to see
if this is a legit token. If it
is a good a legit token, it'll create
a new user if it's the user's first
time logging in. And if it's an invalid
token, it'll give us an error and tell
us that we failed to log in. We've
also written for you a log out function.
Oh, sorry. In the log in function, if
it's a valid token, we also set the
session user to this user so that the
user can be persisted in the session and
we can stay logged in even after we
reload. And what the log out function does
is that it'll set this rec dot session
user to null, so that if the user
clicks the log out button, now the session
doesn't have a user field in it, so
authentication is no longer persisted and a new
user can log in. And you'll also see
that we have a new field called rec
dot user, and later on, we'll see how
we can use this to access the user
information from any API route. Let's look at
a diagram of what's happening. So remember on
our front end, we had our Google login
component, which allows you to access the Google
auth server, which will return a success token
if you've logged in through Google. And in
the back end, we've just written a login
function that will take a token and check
with the Google auth library to verify if
this is a current a valid token. So
take a few minutes to turn and talk
and think about how we can get this
token from the front end all the way
to the back end, so that we can
actually use our auth login function. Okay. Does
anyone wanna take a stab at it? Feel
free to raise your hand. Feel free to
not. What we can do is we can
make a post request. So we can define
a new endpoint in our server called API
login, and what the front end can do
is make a post request and send the
token all the way to our back end.
So similarly for our logout function, on our
front end, the user can now click a
logout button and it'll change the front end
to have a login button now. And what
we wanna do is also tell the back
end that we wanna log out so in
the server, we can get rid of the
session user and this is done by calling
the auth layout function. So similarly, we can
make another post request and tell the back
end that we want to log out. So
that's what you'll be doing next. We want
to connect the front end to the back
end using two post routes. We'll make a
login post route and a log out post
route. So for the first part, we can
go to api.js, and you'll wanna add these
two routes, which we've already written for you
on this slide. And once you've added that
to api.js, go to navbar.jsx on the front
end, and you'll wanna call you wanna post
these routes. And for the login route, you
wanna pass a token parameter, which you can
get by calling res. Credential. And for the
log out function, you'll just need to call
the post route and you won't need to
pass anything through. So take a few minutes
and give that a try and feel free
to hop on the queue if you have
any questions. Or raise your hand and someone
will come. Raise your hand if you need
more time. Okay. Let's go through how we
can do that. So in API.JS, you should've
just added two new post endpoints, router.post, and
this is the login endpoint. And what this
will do is call the auth login function
that we've already written for you, and we'll
do something similar for log out. So this
is in our back end server, and now
we wanna call these endpoints from the front
end. And we wanna do that in nap
bar dot j s x when handle login
and handle log out are called. So first,
in handle login, we can call the post
end point to log in, and we'll do
that by calling post to slash API slash
log in. And wait wait. First, let me
define a variable called user token, and we
get this by getting the response of the
Google server and getting the credential parameter of
that response. So after we have our user
token, we can pass it to our back
end. Through a token parameter, and remember that
a post request is a promise, so we
wanna just or we were trying to send
the user back to the front end, so
let's console log. I'll post the solutions up
so you can also follow along there. And
for handle log out, we don't have to
pass anything to the back end because we
just wanna call the end point and tell
the back end that we're logged out now.
So all we have to do is call
post and call that to our log out
endpoint. So take a second to copy that
if you miss anything. Otherwise, our sign in
flow should now be complete. Because now, in
our front end, we have this Google login
component, which will allow us to log in
through Google's interface. Google should send us a
token back to the front end, and now
that we have a post end point slash
API slash login, we can pass this token
to the back end, which will call auth
dot login and do some stuff in the
server to help us persist the authentication in
a session. And once we click the logout
function, we'll call the API logout endpoint, API
which we'll call auth logout so that we
can remove the user from the session. And
now we'll move on to step three. Oh,
take a second to breathe. This workshop is
very long and we'll take another break in
the middle at some point. Okay. So if
we go back to our cat book, let's
sign in. I mean, go ahead and make
a story. Hello. You make a comment as
well. Here is a comment. Now you'll see
that we're logged in, but it still says
that we're anonymous user. That's because in our
API J s, we set a variable called
my name to anonymous user, so every time
we're posting a story, we're just passing the
string anonymous user to the database. But now
that we're logged in, it'd be great if
we could log the actual user's name that's
logging in so that we can see who's
posting these stories and comments. So let's keep
track of the creators of all our stories
and comments. Turn and talk or take some
take a minute to think about how you
might wanna implement this. For reference, before in
our story field, we have creator name and
content, and now we're keeping track of the
users that use our website through a user
ID. Okay. So what we can do is
we can add a creator ID field to
all our stories and common schemas so that
in our database, we can keep track of
this user information. So your turn. Now we
wanna know the user ID associated with every
story and comment. So you'll first wanna start
by modifying the story schema and comment schema
by adding a creator ID string. And then
you'll also wanna update the post route in
api.j s so that for when we're making
a new story or comment, we're also specifying
the ID of the user that made that
story in comment. And remember that right now,
we're just passing anonymous user to all the
creator names, so instead of that, you wanna
pass the actual user's name. And you can
get this by calling rec.user. Raise your hand
if you need more time for this. Okay.
Let's go through how we can implement these
two steps then. So first, we're gonna modify
the story schema and comment schema. Let's add
a creator ID field and this will be
a type string And in comment dot j
s, we'll do the same thing. And now,
an API dot j s, When we make
a post request for a story, we're gonna
wanna update creator ID and we can get
that from rec dot user rec dot user
dot underscore ID And we'll replace creator name
with rec dot user dot name. And we'll
do something similar for comment or replace creator
name with rack dot user dot name. And
now we wanna insert a new field corresponding
to the unique user that posted that comment.
And we'll get that via rec dot user
dot underscore ID. And here's the solution up
on the slide. Let's revisit cat book. Now
if I post a story, be able to
see my name. Oh, we didn't wanna reload
it. You log in. Okay. Hi. This is
Sophie. Yep. And now, you should be able
to see a name field whenever you make
a story and also if you make a
comment. So give that a try on your
cat book interface and feel free to raise
your hand if you don't see this. Yeah.
Let me do that. Is that better? Okay.
Okay. So now let's check out the step
four if in case you missed anything. So
just to reiterate, what we just did was
we added a creator ID field for both
the story and comment. We also replaced creator
name with the name of the user that's
that made the comment and story. And that
should be reflected in your cat book interface.
And if you wanna learn a bit more
about rec where rec. User came from, you
can check out the hidden slides in the
slideshow. So we just saw that now we
can see a name corresponding to every news
story or a comment that's posted. It'd be
great if we could click these names and
it would take us to a profile corresponding
to that user. So what we wanna do
now is let's add a link so that
we can click on a poster's name and
view their profile. So right now, if we
go to slash profile, we only have one
link for this and you can get it
by going to your nav bar. But what
we wanna do is we we wanna create
a unique URL for every user of Catbook,
and we want this to have the URL
slash profile slash user ID, which we just
went over in Daniel's lecture. So remember that
we can do this by passing in a
user ID parameter into the react router path
for profile. So let's do just that. Go
back to v s code, and you'll wanna
go to index.j s x where our react
router is defined. So here we have the
route for a path profile, and right now,
it's a static route that only takes us
to slash profile. So what we wanna do
is we wanna add slash colon user ID,
this becomes a dynamic route so that the
profile component now accepts a user ID after
the slash profile in the URL. So go
ahead and do that. Okay. So just to
recap, before we had the static route that
slash profile, and now we no longer have
a path at slash profile. So if you
try to go to local host five one
seven three slash profile, you should get an
error. And instead, we'll now have profile pages
that will generate for a slash profile slash
user ID. So now that we have that
link, let's make it so when clicking a
name for each story, it'll take us to
slash profile slash creator ID. Okay. Turn and
talk. Where does creator ID come from and
how can we get it in single story
so that clicking on a name will take
us to this link and we're able to
pass creator ID into that link in single
story. Okay. Did anyone figure out where we
get creator ID from? Or where we can
get it from? It's not yet defined. Okay.
Well, so how the creator information is passed
is in feed. Remember that we make a
get request to slash API slash stories. And
what this API endpoint does is that it
sends all the stories to from the back
end in the database all the way to
our front end. And remember that in the
previous step, we just added a new field
to each story, and that's the creator ID
field. So once we get all these stories,
we're setting the stories array object and feed
to all the story objects that get returned
from the database. And now, all of these
story objects now have a new field called
creator ID. So when we're actually rendering the
components on feed, we're passing in all of
the fields of the story object into a
card component. And now we also have a
creator ID component. So we what we wanna
do is we wanna pass creator ID from
feel sorry, from feed into card so that
card can pass the creator ID down a
single story. Yeah. So creator ID lives in
field and we got this for by making
a post request to the stories. And we
can pass this as a prop to card
and pass that as a prop to single
story. So give that a try. First, you'll
wanna grab the creator ID and pass it
in as a field to card, and then
you'll wanna pass it to single story. And
once you've passed that all the way down,
in single story, you can change the link
so that you can change the user's name
from text to link so that clicking it
takes us to slash profile slash creator ID.
Raise your hand if you need a bit
more time to finish this. Okay. Are we
all good now? Okay. I'll go through how
we can implement these two steps now. So
if you recall, we just went over that
in feed dot j s x, we made
a get request to the back end so
that it sends all the story objects back
to our front end. And when we're rendering,
we're taking this entire stories list and passing
in the fields of the stories into the
card component. So now now that we've added
a creator ID field in our story schema,
let's put that in the creator ID field
in the card. So we can get that
by grabbing story object dot creator ID. So
now the creator ID should be passed into
card. We just added that line here in
free dot jsx. So after we pass that
into card, we'll end up needing creator ID
in single story. So we need to go
to card dot j s x and pass
the creator ID all the way down a
single story. So now that creator ID prop
lives here and we can go to single
story, We can add a new prop called
creator ID and set it equal to props.
Creator ID. So we just added this line
into card dot j s x so that
we can pass the creator ID from feed
to card to single story. So now that
we have the creator ID prop in single
story, we can replace this props. Creator name
span component with a link component that takes
us to slash profile slash creator ID. So
let's replace this with a link component. So
instead of span, we'll replace this with a
link. And with link, we have a two
parameter, which will pass in a link to.
So let's have this take us to /profile/props.
Creator ID. And this should make the creator
name now a link in our front end
interface. So to reiterate, we just pass the
props down to single story and we modify
this line to be a link so that
clicking it should take us to slash profile
slash props dot creator ID, which is a
dynamic route that we just defined in the
previous step in index dot j s x.
So I'll put the solution up on the
slide, and let's take a look at cat
look now. So remember that slash profile is
now four zero four not found because we
no longer have a path for it in
our react router, but instead we have dynamic
paths taking us to slash profile slash user
ID. So if you go back to local
host, you'll see that all the names are
now links. So if I click my name,
it takes me to a profile. While it's
not my profile, it's still a profile page.
And in the next step, we'll go over
how we can modify this page. So if
everyone's ready, you can reset hard in case
you miss any steps and we can check
out to workshop five step five. So I'll
do git reset dash dash hard, and I'll
check out to workshop five step five. Here's
some hints for testing in case you're getting
any bugs. First, you wanna make sure that
you're logged in before posting because you remember
when we post, we're passing in user information
and if you're not logged in, that user
information is null and it'll get mad at
you. And you If you're trying to test
the features for the links and the usernames,
make sure that you're making new posts with
the new changes to test this feature because
previously, we didn't have usernames for the stories
and comments. And if your code works, clicking
on a username should take you to a
link that goes to slash profile slash some
user ID. And the name on the profile
page should currently be wrong, but that's okay
because we'll tackle that in the next step.
So feel free to test that out and
now we'll move on to step five. Okay.
So remember that we just clicked the link
and it took us to Shannon Wu's profile
page. But we don't know who Shannon Wu
is and we want that to take us
to the profile page for the user we
clicked. So that means that we need to
access user dot name from the profile.js x
component, but how do we do that? So
remember, on profile.js x, we have access to
the user ID parameter that was passed in
through the URL in the React router. So
with this user ID, how can we get
the name of the user from profile.jsx? Take
a few minutes to turn and talk with
a neighbor and think about how we can
use the user ID in the profile page
to grab the name of the user. Okay.
Does anyone wanna raise their hand and take
a stab at this question? Yeah. Yeah. Exactly.
Good job. So what we can do is
we can make a get request by passing
in the user ID as a parameter to
our back end server. And if you remember
from the databases lecture, we're using a library
in our back end called Mongoose, and Mongoose
has query functions that allow us to search
in the user database by ID or by
certain queries. So what we're gonna do now
is we'll pass the user ID into a
get request to the back end server, and
we'll have this user endpoint that will find
the user by ID from the database, and
it'll pass all of this user information along
to the front end after the get request
returns. Okay. So what we wanna do is
write an API route that gives us information
about a user. We kinda already talked about
this but just to reiterate, we're now working
on or yeah, turn and talk. Which part
of the diagram are we gonna work on
to give us information about a user and
what does this a p riot route have
to do? Kinda already gave away the answer,
but I think it's just good to think
about and talk through again with a partner.
Okay, yeah. So just to recap, we're now
gonna be working we're gonna first be working
on this part of the diagram because we
wanna grab information about the user from our
MongoDB database. So what's gonna happen is the
API route defined in API.js is gonna use
a Mongoose query to find the user by
the user ID. So let's start by implementing
the API route in API.js. And this is
gonna be a get endpoint that's gonna use
a mongoose query to find the user document
of the user given the user ID. And
as a hint, you can use the user
dot find by ID function and pass in
the user ID there. As a hint, where
it says insert ID here, we wanna be
passing in the user ID as a parameter.
And how we can get that parameter is
by getting by entering rec dot query dot
user ID. Another hint is that a mongoose
query is a promise, so after, you should
use a dot den and send the user
back to the front end by using res
dot send. So those are two hints I
have for you and now take another minute
or two to finish writing your code. Raise
your hand if you need another minute. Okay.
Let's go through how we can implement this
API route to grab information about the user
by passing in the user ID through a
parameter. So this is a get endpoint that
we're calling in our front end. So we'll
wanna start by using router dot get, and
we want this endpoint to live in slash
user. So in the first argument, pass in
a string called slash user. You wanna take
the rack and res objects and now in
the body of the function or you function
or You should use the find by ID
mongoose function. So we'll take a user object
which connects to the user collection in the
database. So user dot find by ID and
in the argument of this function, we wanna
pass in the user ID. And remember that
this is a get request, so we can
get it from the front end by entering
rec dot query dot user ID. So now,
this function will go through your Mongo database,
look through the users collection, and find the
user that has this user ID. Remember that
Mongoose queries are promises, so we're gonna wanna
make this a dot then. And we're also
gonna wanna send this user back to the
front end. So we'll take the user as
the parameter, and we'll send this in the
response back to the front end by doing
res dot send. And in the send, we'll
wanna pass in the user. So this is
a user object with all of the user
fields that we define in our user schema
in an earlier step. And now we have
a get endpoint to slash user. Here's the
solution by the way, to slash user and
it'll go through the database, find the user
that has this ID and send the entire
user object back to your front end. So
take a minute to copy that down. And
now that we have this user endpoint, as
our friend mentioned earlier here, we're gonna wanna
call this get endpoint from nav sorry, from
the profile page so that we can pass
the username into that and render it on
the front interface. Okay. So hopefully, you guys
have this get endpoint copied down now. If
you don't, you can refer back to the
slides. And now that we have this endpoint,
our next step is to update profile.jsx. What
we wanna do is we wanna update the
name to show user dot name instead of
Shannon Wu. So remember that as we covered
in Daniel's lecture earlier, the React router will
pass in the user ID parameter of the
URL into use params dot user ID. So
you can use that when you're making an
API call to API slash user by passing
that as your argument to the endpoint. So
what we wanna do now is we wanna
make an API call and profile dot j
s x to slash API slash user, and
you wanna pass the user ID to the
back end, and you can get the user
ID by using use params dot user ID.
Don't worry about the loading step for now,
we can go over that together after you
implement the first check mark step, which is
to make an API call and pass that
back to the front end. As a hint,
you wanna make this API call in a
use effect, and you want this use effect
to be called upon the render of profile.jsx.
Raise your hand if you need a bit
more time to complete the first step of
this slide. Okay. So let's go through how
we can call the, user get endpoint in
the back end from profile.jsx. So if we
call this endpoint, we're gonna need to save
this information somewhere. So what we can do
is start by defining a user state. So
let's do const user set user, and let's
use the u state hook. And initially, we
won't know what the user is, so we'll
just initialize the user state to null. Now
that we have this user state, we can
make a get request, and this should happen
in a use effect hook. And the use
effect hook should have a dependency of an
empty array, because we want this use effect
to be called at the initial rendering of
profile dot j s x. So let's start
by making a use effect. And what we
want to happen in this use effect is
we want to make a get request to
slash API slash user. And we wanna pass
in a user ID. So let's define the
user ID really quickly above the use effect,
and remember that we're gonna use use params.
User ID. So let's do let user ID
equal use params. User ID. But this ID
is capitalized because that's just how we defined
it as a parameter in the URL. So
be aware of how the capitalization is here.
It's just a notation we're using. So we
just defined a user ID variable on line
18. And now on line 20, let's pass
that in when we're making a get request.
So we're making a get request, and this
is a promise. So we want to send
and remember that our get request returns the
user object. So once we have that user
object, let's set our user state and profile
to user. So what just happened here was
we define a user state that can be
stored on the profile page. We're making a
get request and this use effect that's called
at the rendering of profile of the profile
page. We're passing the user ID from the
URL parameter to the back end. The back
end is taking this user ID and querying
the database for the user corresponding to this
ID, and it's being sent back so that
we can set our variable now to user.
So one thing we wanna do now is
we wanna show a loading component or page
if the user hasn't load yet, or else
this error might occur that like you the
name doesn't yet exist, so you'll get a
type error that you can't read this name
property. So we can use a conditional operator
again. So my next step for you is
to check if you should check if the
user object is null. If the user object
is null, you should just show like a
text element that says loading. Otherwise, you should
render everything else on this page. So give
that a try. In case you missed it,
this is what I just wrote. Let's go
through the conditional rendering now. Similar to the
earlier step, we can wrap everything in brackets.
We'll check if user is no or not.
So if it's if not user, we're gonna
want to have a loading component. So let's
just put it between dev dev brackets and
say like, oh, loading. Otherwise, we wanna render
everything else. So we can copy paste everything
else and wrap it in these parentheses. Notation
wrong. Okay. I think I just have a
typo somewhere. Hold on. Okay. I just pasted
everything into the second argument of the conditional
rendering and I wrapped everything in a parent
element. So you can do that by using
these empty angular brackets. Once you have that,
it should conditionally render loading if user is
undefined and if you're getting any problems with
this, just don't worry about it and you
can get checkout on the next step. And
one thing we didn't do is, right now
it still says Shannon Wu. So we're gonna
wanna pass our new user element and we
wanna grab the name parameter of the user
object. Remember that user was defined earlier as
a react state above here. So what we
should have now is in local host. If
you click on a profile, oh, awkward. Oh.
What did you say? Okay. Use params is
not defined. Oh, oops. We have to import
it. So we wanna import use params from
react here. That should work now, maybe. Typo?
Wait, I don't remember where use params is
imported from. Oh, okay. Sorry you guys. You
wanna import re use params from react router
dom. And we also wanna import get from
Utilities. Alright. So don't worry about importing all
of this. You guys can just watch and
check out to the next step after this.
If you import the get so that we
can make the request and import the use
params, you should be able to see your
name if you click on a story and
the user of that story. So let's just
get check out to the next step. If
you made any changes, wanna reset dash dash
hard first and then check out to step
six. So now on step six, you should
check by going to your feed and clicking
on one of the usernames and see that
it takes you to a profile page with
that user's name. So just a recap of
all the changes that were made in step
five. We now have a u r a
dynamic URL at slash profile slash user ID
that takes in this user ID parameter. And
now we make a get request to our
back end so that we can get the
user object corresponding to this user ID. And
if we get that user object onto the
profile page, we can grab the name parameter
of this user object and pass it in
and render that instead of Shannon Wu. Okay.
So now let's move on with step six.
So you might notice that if you click
the profile page of your nav bar, you'll
see that the profile link is broken. And
this is because earlier, in index dot j
s x, we changed our profile route so
that we have a dynamic route that renders
at slash profile slash user ID. And we
no longer have a route in our router
that goes to slash profile. So what we
want to do is we want this profile
page to take us to the profile corresponding
to the logged in user. Oh. Oh yeah.
Just as I explained, we now have a
dynamic route at slash profile slash user ID,
so slash profile should be not found out.
So we wanna go to slash profile slash
user ID if we click on the profile
once we're logged in. But what is your
user ID? So now we also wanna maintain
a user ID react state in our nav
bar. So the next step is in nav
bar dot j s x, we'll wanna set
a user ID state once we call a
post request to log in. And we wanna
remove this user ID from the state once
we call post slash log out, and this
will be replacing our earlier React state of
logged in. So let's go through how we
can do that together. Let's go to navbar.jsx,
and we wanna replace this logged in state
now with a user ID state. We can
also use the user ID state to keep
track of whether we're logged in or not,
because the user ID state should be null
if we're logged out. So let's replace this
with user ID, set user ID, and we
wanna initialize the user ID to null because
initially, we won't know if we're logged in
or not and we should be logged out,
there should be no user corresponding to the
user ID. So once we have that react
state and handle login, we should now update
the user ID state. So let's get rid
of the line that says logged in a
true because we no longer have that state.
And now let's update the user ID state.
So let's set user set user set user
ID to user dot slash ID, and remember
that user is an object that the login
endpoint is sending back to us that contains
information about the user, and we can grab
the ID parameter from that. So similarly, in
handle logout, let's get rid of the set
logged in, because as you remember, we just
got rid of that state and we now
have a user ID state replacing that. And
now we'll wanna set user ID to null.
So what we just did was we updated
the logic and handle login and handle logout
so that we're setting user ID accordingly based
on whether we're logged in or not. And
now that we have the user ID, we
want to link to slash profile slash user
ID instead of slash profile. So let's go
to line this line where our profile link
is defined. Right now, links to slash profile,
but instead of slash profile, let's have it
linked to slash profile slash user ID. So
I'll paste the solution up on the slides
and you can copy that. Oh, wait, I
explained to the step after that. So So
once you have the logic for setting the
user ID, we wanna move on to the
next step which is linking it to slash
profile slash user ID which I accidentally just
showed. But in case you missed it, I'll
give you a few minutes to give it
a try on your own and we can
go over it again. Yeah? Okay. So to
do this, we just modified this slash profile
link to slash profile slash user ID. And
the solutions are up on the slides. So
now our profiling should take us so if
you go back to our home page. So
instead of when we're conditionally rendering sign out,
instead of checking whether logged in is null,
we should be checking whether user ID is
null. Okay. So now, what should happen is
if you're logged in, and if you click
the profile page, it should take you to
your own profile. So give that a try.
And we'll move on to step seven. Let's
do git reset dash dash hard and go
to git checkout w five step seven. And
once you're on step seven, you should be
able to do what we just shown and
if you're logged in and click the profile
page on that bar, it should take you
to your own profile page. So make sure
that works while you're on step seven. And
note that if I'm logged in, if I
refresh the page, it takes me back to
a signed out state. So that means once
you refresh, user ID is reset because it's
stored in a state. But remember in the
back end, we already stored the user information
into a session. This means that the back
end remembers if you're logged in or not,
because it keeps rec dot user filled with
the user's information in your session, but the
front end forgot because user ID is now
stored as a state. So every time that
navbar.jsx renders, we need to ask the server,
are we still logged in and if so,
what's my user ID? So take twenty seconds
to think about how we can check if
we're still logged in or not. Yeah. Okay.
So remember that our user information is persisted
in the back end in your session, so
we wanna make another get request to the
back end. And we wanna request to the
back end. And we wanna check if rec
dot user is still filled in, because that
means that the user information is still in
our session and we should be good to
stay logged in. So we're gonna implement a
new get endpoint called whoami. And you're gonna
implement this new route in api.js. It looks
like no parameters, and all it'll do is
return if it'll return rec dot user if
it exists, and if it doesn't, it'll return
empty brackets. So we can start with the
first step and implement this route in api
dot j s. And let's go ahead and
write that together. So open up api dot
j s, and let's set up the get
route to who am I. So we'll do
router dot get, and we want this endpoint
to live in slash who am I. We'll
take the rec and res objects. And if
this get endpoint is called, we wanna check
if rec dot user exists. So what we
can do is use an if statement. If
rec dot user If it exists, then we'll
wanna send this rec dot user back to
our front end. So we wanna do res
dot send rec dot user. This will send
the user at in the response. Otherwise, we'll
have else, and we wanna send empty brackets.
So this is a get endpoint at whoami,
which will send rec dot user if it
exists, and otherwise, it'll send nothing. So copy
that down in api.js, and once you have
this API endpoint, we wanna call this route
in nav bar, so that every time nav
bar loads, it's gonna ask the back end,
oh, are we still logged in? And if
so, it's gonna fill in the user ID
state that we defined in navbar, fill it
in so that every time you reload, your
authentication should be persisted. Let's go to navbar.jsx,
and let's make a get request. So in
the top of the navbar component, we'll call
who am I inside a use effect. So
let's do use effect. And we want the
dependency array to be empty because we want
this to be called every time that your
nav bar page loads. So here's the skeleton
for these effect. Inside the use effect, let's
make our get request. So we'll make a
get request to slash api slash who am
I, and this is a promise that's gonna
return with the user object from the back
end. So we'll wanna do that then. We'll
take the user and just to be robust,
we'll check again if user ID exists. Or
sorry, we'll check if user ID exists, and
if so, we'll set our user ID state
to user dot slash ID. Isn't it right
here? Oh, okay. Wait. What? Okay. So just
to reiterate, now we're using the use effect
hook to call the get endpoint at who
am I to get the user ID if
it's still in the session, and this should
set our user ID state to user dot
slash ID. So that's the second step, and
what we wanna do now is that if
the user is logged out, we'll wanna hide
the profile button because there will not be
a user using the application, so we don't
want a profile button. So let's go down
to where profile is being rendered, and we'll
wanna do conditional rendering again. And we can
wrap this all in brackets, and we'll check
if user id is null. So we can
do this by saying if both user id
sorry, if user id is true, we'll render
this profile link. So you can write that
here. You wanna put this in parentheses. So
I'll post the solution on the slides. You
see that? Think it's here. Okay. And if
it's not working, you wanna make sure import
use effect in the top line. Okay. So
after all those changes are made, what should
happen now is if you sign in and
if you refresh. Let me reiterate all the
changes we just made to nav bar. So
first, we imported use effect on the first
line so that we can call this hook
when we're making our get request. Upon loading,
we'll use this use effect to call the
get request, and if the user ID exists,
we're gonna set user ID to the user
dot slash ID, which we get from our
back end. And then, we'll conditionally render the
profile button to only show if user ID
is not null. So after all those changes
are made and you're logged in, you should
be able to refresh and it'll persist your
authentication. If you miss any of the steps,
feel free to git reset dash dash hard
and check out to w five step eight.
So we'll do that, git reset dash dash
hard, git checkout, workshop five step eight. Okay.
So now what happens upon refresh? Every time
that we reload navbar dot j s x,
the use effect will call the API endpoint.
So who am I? Who am I will
check if the user still exists in the
session, and it'll send the user object if
it does, empty brackets if it doesn't. We
have one last problem. If we go back
to cat book, and if we're signed out,
you you'll notice that we're able to make
new stories and new comments even if we're
not logged in. And this is bad because
when we're making these stories and comments, we
have a field called user dot name. But
because there's no user logged in, it'll be
null and you'll have a you'll have a
failure in making these post requests. So what
we wanna do is, if we're not logged
in, we'll wanna hide the input fields for
both the new story and new comment. Let's
hide the input fields if the user is
not logged in. So let's revisit the React
hierarchy of feed. So here's what how the
React components are nested within each other, and
what we wanna do is we wanna hide
the new story and new common components if
we're not logged in. And remember that the
new story and new common components are called
in the parent component, so both feed and
comments block will need to know whether we're
logged in or not, so that they can
conditionally render their child component depending on that
state. So one solution is to call the
who am I get endpoint in both feed
and comments block to check whether we're logged
in or not. That's bad, because remember that
these who am I get endpoints will be
called at each time we render the app.
So every time we reload the app, we're
gonna get not just two, but three get
requests made, and that is really unnecessary, and
it calls api slash whoami way too many
times. So one solution we can do is
we can call this whoami endpoint once at
the rendering of app, which encapsulates everything, and
we can take the user ID returned by
whoami and pass it all the way down
to all these components using props. This is
a better solution than what we just offered
with making three calls to whoami, because this
only calls whoami once, and it'll pass everything
down as props. But this is bad because
we're prop drilling, and that means that we're
passing props unnecessarily through many components to get
to a child component. And as mentioned in
Daniel's lecture, this can get really complicated and
we don't want that. So what's another way
to maintain just one API call in app
dot jsx? Think back to what we covered
in the lecture this morning, yeah. Yeah, exactly.
So what we can do is we can
wrap everything in context, and what we'll do
is we'll make a get request in the
app. This will give us a user ID,
and this user ID will live in a
context that wraps everything. And because all of
these child components are wrapped in the context,
they'll also be able to access user ID.
Remember that state changes in your context re
renders the components consuming the context. So this
means we have we're storing one object in
our context, and that's user ID. If user
ID was to change at all, everything would
get re rendered. So is this a good
scenario to use context? Thumbs up if yes
and thumbs down if no. Yeah, I'm seeing
some thumbs up and yeah, does someone wanna
tell me why? Yeah. Yeah, exactly. So we're
only changing user ID if we log in
and log out, which you don't expect to
happen that many times over the course of
the user using the application. There might be
like other scenarios where you have an variable
in your context that might change a lot
throughout the course of the app existing and
that's bad. But yeah, this would be a
good use case of context because user ID
will only change upon login and log out.
So we don't have repeated unnecessary rerendering, so
this is a great use case for context.
So let's do just that. First, let's if
you're not on step eight already, make sure
to reset dash dash hard and check out
the w w five step eight. We have
a new file called context, which now lives
in the components folder. Sorry, in the context
folder, in components, this is called user context.
So let's go through the process of creating
a context. We want this context to live
in a file outside of all of our
components, and we wanna import the create context
from react. And we wanna export a user
context element. Export const user context, and we
wanna use create context and initialize our user
context. And we'll initialize it to null because
we don't know what our user value is
gonna be at. So this should be in
user context dot j s x, and all
we've done is added these two lines to
define a user context element. So remember that
we said we would make one API call
now in app.jsx, and we'll store this user
ID information in app and pass it into
the user context in app. But because handle
login and handle logout will modify user ID,
and user ID is now handled in app,
we'll wanna move not only the who am
I call up from nav bar to app,
we'll also wanna move handle login and handle
log out up to app.jsx. So let's go
through how we can do that together. So
first, let's go to navbar dot jsx. Here
we have the get request of who am
I, a handle login function and a handle
log out function. So let's copy paste all
three of these. Oh, copy paste everything including
the user ID definition because we'll wanna move
these up to app dot j s x.
So everything between these slash dividers, copy it,
and let's go to app dot j s
x, and let's paste it above the return.
Now, we've moved the user ID state, the
get request to who am I, handle login
function, and handle logout function all to app
dot j s x. But remember that nav
bar dot j s x directly calls handle
login and handle logout if we click the
buttons. So I wanna pass handle login and
handle logout down as props. So what we
can do is let's go to where nav
bar is defined. Let's pass in handle login
as a prop, And this passes the whole
function down, and we'll also wanna pass handle
logout as a prop. So just to reiterate,
we passed we moved the who am I
handle login, handle logout, and user ID up
to app, and now we've passed handle login
and handle logout down to nav bar. But
what we need to do in nav bar
is, now we wanna reference handle login as
a prop, because it no longer is defined
in nav bar. So here, where we have
the log out button, on click, we should
call props. Handle log out. Similarly for the
Google login component, on success should call props.handle
log in, remember because handle log in and
handle log out are no longer defined in
nav bar. What I just changed was modifying
these as fields of the prop sorry, parameters
of the prop. Here's the code if you
missed that. Okay. So now that we have
our user ID now defined in app, we
wanna wrap all the components inside our app
inside a context provider. And this context provider
will have one value, and that value will
be our user ID. We're wrapping everything inside
our app inside the context provider because we
want anything inside our app to be able
to access this value, which is the user
ID. So let's go to the return statement
of app dot j s x. So we
wanna wrap these four lines in the context
provider. So above nav bar, let's go ahead
and take user context dot provider and set
its value to user ID. And we wanna
take the closing tag and place it under
those four lines. So now we've wrapped the
nav bar and the outlet inside the context
provider, and it'll pass in the value of
user ID, which is set in the rendering
of app. Oh. And remember that we defined
user context in a different file, so what
we wanna do is import that and you
can do that by uncommenting up here. You
wanna uncomment that line so we have we're
able to access this user context in the
other file. And do the same thing in
nav bar. So once we've wrapped everything in
the provider, we still have to access the
user ID in nav bar in some way.
And just now in nav bar, we uncommented
the import of user context, and we can
consume user ID from the context. So let's
go through how we can do that. We
can use this simple line, we'll set a
variable const user ID, we'll use context and
pass in user context. And right now, user
context has a singular value, so it'll take
the singular value of user context and put
it in our user ID variables that lives
in nav bar. We'll also want to import
use context on the first line of navbar
dot jsx. Oh no, sorry. We wanna import
that in React Router DOM. I think. Let
me check. I guess we'll see if it
works or not. Okay. Sorry. Oh, okay. So
now far you want to import use context.
Also, I think. This is wrong. Oh. Okay.
In app dot j s x, I also
imported user context wrong. It should be slash
components slash context. Or And we'll also wanna
import get, so copy the get and post
import line from nav bar and paste it
into app dot j s x. Okay. Alright.
Just to reiterate, we imported get and so
this is app dot j s x, and
we're now making the get request in app,
so we need to import get into app,
and this is done via line three. And
we are also using the user context object,
which we define in user context dot x,
so we have to import that into apps
as in line five. So we have two
new import statements. After we import those, remember
that we copy paste the user ID, the
get request, handle login, and handle log out
from nav bar. And we're passing the handle
login and handle log out functions down to
nav bar. And what we've changed in nav
bar is instead of getting user ID via
the who am I endpoint, we're just taking
it from our context by importing user context
from the user context file we defined earlier,
and then we're setting that to the value
inside the user context. So hopefully everything still
works. Hopefully, you can log in. And everything
should still persist. And remember, our motivation for
using context is so that we can hide
the input fields for story and comments by
looking at the value of user ID. And
instead of making the who am I get
request everywhere, we're gonna store that information in
the context. So we'll also need to access
the context from some other components. So we'll
go over that in the final step. Okay,
so that was a lot. Just to reiterate,
we rearranged our code so that we now
store user ID in a global context, and
that's so that we can now access user
ID from any component in app.js x. So
now feel free to git reset hard dash
dash hard, git checkout step nine. And our
last step will be hiding the input boxes
if we're logged out. So remember that in
nav bar dot j s x, we just
went over how we can consume the context
and set user id to the value of
user context. So you wanna do something very
similar in feed dot jsx in comments block.
So what you'll wanna do is you'll wanna
import the user context and you'll just wanna
set user ID to the value of that
context, and you'll wanna conditionally render new story
and new comment if user ID exists. Okay.
Okay. So let's go over how we can
do that together. Let's start by going to
feed. I we've already imported user context for
you, so all we need to do is
consume it. So let's do const user ID
and set this equal to use context user
context. Now you wanna conditionally render new story.
So let's put this in brackets, and if
user ID exists, we'll render new story as
well. Let's just check and you'll see that
if we go back to the input fields,
you no longer see the input field for
story. I'll post the solution up for that.
And you can do the same thing in
oh, what was the other one? You can
do the same thing in comments block. We
already imported user context, you just need to
consume the context and place into user ID
variable. And then we'll wanna conditionally render the
new comment component. Okay. And now, you should
see that the input field should disappear for
both comments and stories. And that's the end
of cat book. Yay. Good job guys, that
was a lot. And now we'll hand it
over to Daniel.